
libmeh - cryptography for lazy people
=====================================

About 
-----

libmeh is a small cryptographic library written in C99 that has been
in very, very slow development since 2009. After being horrified by
OpenSSL's API back around 2004 or 2005, I decided to eventually create
a cryptographic library in C that was relatively simple to use. This
is what I have so far.

Installation
------------

libmeh uses Check for its unit tests, so you'll need to have that
installed if you want to run `make` from the root directory (`aptitude
install check` on Debian systems). Otherwise, you can run `make` from
the `src` directory and still compile successfully.  You'll end up
with `libmeh.so` and `libmeh.a`, either of which you can subsequently
link against. There is no `make install` for reasons outlined below.

Usage
-----

Don't. No, seriously, don't. libmeh is a tiny project being
semi-maintained by one person and has virtually no documentation,
which is the last thing you want in a cryptographic library (any
library, really, but especially a cryptographic one). Just for fun
though, I'll detail how to run the unit tests that currently exist and
include some examples of working code below, so you can get a feel for
the ideas behind the project.

If you're shopping about for a decent C crypto library, I suggest you
look into both
[LibTomCrypt](http://libtom.org/?page=features&newsitems=5&whatfile=crypt)
and [libsodium](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium) (which is a
pretty wrapper around [djb's NaCl](http://nacl.cr.yp.to/)).

Testing
-------

After running `make` in the root directory, `cd` into the `test`
directory and run:

    ./test

You should see some output hopefully specifying zero failures. The
unit tests aren't currently comprehensive (they test hashes and stream
ciphers only, not key derivation functions or message authentication
codes).

Example
-------

libmeh organizes primitives into various categories and provides a
unified API for each category. For example, every hash is a `MehHash`,
and every `MehHash` supports `meh_update_hash` and
`meh_finish_hash`. This means, as an example, that you can pass around
hash contexts without worrying about precisely which hash function
you're given.

Here's some example code for encrypting a string with RC4 (which you
should probably never use):

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include "meh.h"

    int main(void) {
        unsigned char output[9]; 
        size_t got;
        int i;

        MehCipher r = meh_get_cipher(MEH_RC4, "Key", 3);
        meh_update_cipher(r, "Plaintext", output, 9, &got);

        for (i = 0; i < got; i++)
            printf("%02x", output[i]);
        printf("\n");

        meh_reset_cipher(r, "Key", 3);
        meh_update_cipher(r, output, output, 9, &got);
        meh_finish_cipher(r);
        meh_destroy_cipher(r);
    
        for (i = 0; i < got; i++)
            printf("%02x", output[i]);
        printf("\n");

        return EXIT_SUCCESS;
    }

Not particularly pretty, but C rarely ever is. It's also possible to
use a key derivation function, such as PBKDF2, in order to generate a
key for a cipher:

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include "meh.h"

    int main(void) {

        unsigned char output[32];
        size_t got;
        int i;

        MehKDF k = meh_get_kdf(MEH_PBKDF2, MEH_SHA1,
                               "password", 8,
                               "ATHENA.MIT.EDUraeburn", 21,
                               1200);
        meh_update_kdf(k, output, 32, &got);
        meh_finish_kdf(k);
        meh_destroy_kdf(k);
    
        for (i = 0; i < 32; i++)
            printf("%02x", output[i]);
        printf("\n");
 
        return EXIT_SUCCESS;
    }

As you can see, the code for these vastly different primitives follows
a very similar structure.

The `meh_get_*` functions allocate a context for you based on the
primitive you specify. In the case of `meh_get_kdf` and
`meh_get_cipher`, these functions are variadic so that different
specific key derivation functions and ciphers (which may expect
different parameters) can be supported. A good example is that of
stream ciphers versus block ciphers. The latter requires a mode of
operation. The former does not. This means that block ciphers require
at least one extra parameter (you are using an IV with your stream
ciphers, right?), but both are supported through the same interface.

As you would expect, `meh_update_*` will update the given primitive's
context with the information you specify. For example, in the case of
a cipher, this information must be the context, the input, the output,
the input's length, and then a pointer to a `size_t` where the number
of ciphertext bytes written to the output will be given (this is
useful for primitives like block ciphers, where you may not always get
the same length output that you put in, depending on the mode of
operation).

In order to finalize an operation, you may need to call
`meh_finish_*`. In the case of a cipher or hash, this may result in
all necessary padding being applied and the final block being written
to the supplied buffer.

Finally, a call to `meh_destroy_*` will deallocate the given
primitive's context. Sometimes this is as simple as calling `free` on
the supplied context (as is the case with most hash functions), but in
the case of more complex primtives (particularly those built atop of
other primitives, such as HMAC and PBKDF2), there is a more
complicated chain of internal calls to `free` which must first take
place.
